# Monitor your houseplants with a NodeMCU ESP8266 microcontroller and a capacitive sensor

Often, it's hard to observe moisture in soil, making it hard to judge whether your houseplants need water. This is a problem that can be countered with sensors. Of course, sensors need to be hooked up to a device to interpret and process signals. I was looking for a lightweight Arduino-like piece of hardware with integrated Wi-Fi and found the ESP8266. The fact that the board is open-source, programmable through the Arduino IDE and costs under €5 make it an appealing choice for a first internet-of-things project. Its specifications can be found [here](https://components101.com/development-boards/nodemcu-esp8266-pinout-features-and-datasheet#:~:text=NodeMCU%20is%20an%20open%2Dsource,on%20the%20ESP%2D12%20module.) and to give you an idea what else you can make check [this](https://randomnerdtutorials.com/projects-esp8266/) out.

&nbsp;

Soil moisture is the amount of water that is present in the soil. A capacitive soil moisture sensor detects and measures anything that influences its capacitance, such as water. There are also alternatives, such as a conductivity sensor which has two electrodes that get voltage applied. A change in conductivity can be attributed to a change in the amount of water present in soil, as water increases conductivity. Then there are also [leaf sensors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leaf_sensor#:~:text=A%20leaf%20sensor%20is%20a,moisture%20level%20in%20plant%20leaves.) that measure hydrostatic pressure in plant cells, which increases when the plant is hydrated and vice versa. Eventually I went with the capacitive sensor because they're cheap, have a faster response and have lower noise compared to the alternatives. 
